[docs] Editing page with demos (#1287)
mui-org/material-ui-x: docs/src/pages/components/data-grid/editing/editing.md

# Data Grid - Editing

<p class="description">The data grid has built-in edit capabilities that you can customize to your needs.</p>

## Cell editing

Cell editing allows to edit the value of one cell at a time.

- set `editable` attribute of the column definition `GridColDef` object to `true` to allow editing cells of this column.

```tsx
<DataGrid columns={[{ field: 'name', editable: true }]} />
```

### Start Editing

If a column is editable and if a cell has focus.

- Press <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> to switch to edit mode
- Press <kbd class="key">Delete</kbd> to delete the value
- Type any alpha key to start editing
- Double click to switch to edit mode

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/BasicEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Stop Editing

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a cell is in edit mode and has focus, any of the following interactions will stop the edit mode:
```

> - <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> to rollback changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> keydown. It will also roll back changes done in the value of the cell.
```

> - <kbd class="key">Tab</kbd> to save and goes to next cell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A <kbd class="key">Tab</kbd> keydown. It will also save and goes to next cell on the same row.
```

> - <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> to save and goes to next cell below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> keydown. It will also save and goes to next cell on the same column.
```

> - Click outside the cell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A mousedown outside the cell
```

### Control cell editability

In addition to the `editable` flag on columns, control which cell is editable using `isCellEditable` prop.

> _In this demo, `Name` is not editable, and only the rows with an even `Age` value are editable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this demo, the column `Name` is not editable. Only the rows with an even `Age` value are editable.
```

> We applied a green background for a better visibility._

Reviewer: No we, [point 1.](https://www.notion.so/Technical-documentation-7e55b517ac2e489a9ddb6d0f6dd765de)

```suggestion
The editable cells have a green background for better visibility.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/IsCellEditableGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

### Control editing

> The `editRowsModel` lets you control the editing.
> 
> - implement the `onEditRowModelChange` to control the state of the `GridEditRowsModel` model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `editRowsModel` prop lets you control the editing state.
You can handle the `onEditRowModelChange` callback to control the `GridEditRowsModel` state.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/EditRowModelControlGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> #### value Getter

Reviewer: I suspect this header better summarizes the problem this section solve

```suggestion
#### Committed value
```

Author: it's about `valueGetter`

Reviewer: The content didn't seem to focus on this

Author: How to edit cells that have a valueGetter is the topic of this section

Reviewer: Ahhhhh. I was completely confused by this section. What do you think about adding another one on validation?

Author: Adding another demo? 
There is one

> If the column definition process their data using a `valueGetter`.
> 
> - set the underlying data by implementing `onEditCellChangeCommitted` event handler invoked when the change is submitted, and the grid is about to update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can control the committed value when the edit move stops with the `onEditCellChangeCommitted` prop.
This is especially interesting when using the `valueGetter` on the column definition. 
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValueGetterGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

> ### Validation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Client-side validation
```

> To validate cell values on input change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the following steps to validate the value in the cells.
```

> - set the event handler `onEditCellChange` invoked when a change is triggered by the edit input component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set the event handler `onEditCellChange`. It's invoked when a change is triggered by the edit input component.
```

> - set the event handler `onEditCellChangeCommitted` to validate when the change is committed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set the event handler `onEditCellChangeCommitted` to only persist a value when valid. It's invoked when an end-user requests a change to be committed.
```

Author: What you're saying is not the same, I mean we can also do validation at this stage

Reviewer: I was confused by "to validate when the change is committed". "validate" made me think of format validation, which it seems to be about when the user requests to save the changes, hence why I have used "persist".

Author: Set the event handler `onEditCellChangeCommitted` to validate or persist the new value. This handler is invoked when an end-user requests a change to be committed and before the cell revert back to view mode.

> - or use the `GridEditRowsModel` mentioned in [Control Editing](#control-editing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Alternatively, you can use the `GridEditRowsModel` state mentioned in the [Control editing](#control-editing) section.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateRowModelControlGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

> #### using ApiRef

Reviewer: For consistency: e.g. https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/rows/#apiref

```suggestion
#### Using apiRef [<span class="pro"></span>](https://material-ui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)
```

> If you purchased XGrid, it will be quicker to use `apiRef` to do that.

Reviewer: This adds no relevant information, and I would even disagree, this looks worse from a DX perspective

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Maybe

```suggestion
Alternatively, you can use the imperative `setEditCellProps` method to commit values once the validation criteria are met.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateCellApiRefGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

### Server side

> Server side validation works just like client side [validation](#validation).

Reviewer: just is most often to be prohibited.

```suggestion
Server-side validation works like client-side [validation](#validation).
```

> - use the `GridEditRowsModel` mentioned in [Control Editing](#control-editing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- use the `GridEditRowsModel` mentioned in the [Control editing](#control-editing) section.
```

- or set the event handler `onEditCellChange` for `keydown` validation
- set the event handler `onEditCellChangeCommitted` to validate and update the server when the change is committed.

> **Note:** To prevent the default client side behavior, use `event.stopPropagation()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** To prevent the default client-side behavior, use `event.stopPropagation()`.
```

> _This demo shows how you can validate a username asynchronously and prevent the user from committing the value while validating._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This demo shows how you can validate a username asynchronously and prevent the user from committing the value while validating.

```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateServerNameGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ### Customization
> 
> #### Component

Reviewer: This is not in the TOC, it seems to be a missed opportunity for discoverability

```suggestion
### Custom edit component
```

> To customize the edit component of a column
> 
> - set the `renderEditCell` function available in the column definition `GridColDef`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To customize the edit component of a column, set the `renderEditCell` function available in the column definition `GridColDef`.
```

> _The demo lets you edit the ratings by double clicking the cell._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The demo lets you edit the ratings by double-clicking the cell.

```

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/RenderRatingEditCellGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer: The DX is not great on the rating demo. I believe we can make the same review as in https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/pull/1321#pullrequestreview-627814670. 1. the layout should not move 2. we should have a clear feedback that we are on edit mode and not read mode

Author: Is this a blocker? Can we create a separate issue?

Reviewer: Could you rebase? I believe @m4theushw already fixed this on HEAD.

Author: done

Reviewer: I guess the only issue now is with the layout shift:

![shift](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/114693672-20cdc980-9d1a-11eb-947e-e76f839788a6.gif)

> #### Edit using external button

Reviewer: This is not in the TOC, it seems to be a missed opportunity for discoverability.

```suggestion
### Edit using external button
```

> By default, cells turn to edit mode using the keyboard or by double clicking on it.
> 
> - Customize that behaviour and override it completely as shown in this demo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can override the default [start editing](#start-editing) triggers using the `event.stopPropagation()` API on the synthetic React events.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/StartEditButtonGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

### Events

The editing feature leverages the event capability of the grid and the apiRef.
The following events can be used to customize the edition:

> - `cellEditEnter`: emitted when the cell turns to edit mode.

Reviewer: Didn't we say that we would be going with documenting the const first instead of the string?

```suggestion
- `GRID_CELL_EDIT_ENTER`: emitted when the cell turns to edit mode.
```

Not sure, I guess @m4theushw planned to work on an RFC to continue the discussion

Author: I had the old version on the PR hence why I put the value

- A <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> keydown. It will also save and goes to next cell on the same column.
- A mousedown outside the cell

### Control cell editability

In addition to the `editable` flag on columns, control which cell is editable using `isCellEditable` prop.

In this demo, the column `Name` is not editable. Only the rows with an even `Age` value are editable.
The editable cells have a green background for better visibility.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/IsCellEditableGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

### Control editing

The `editRowsModel` prop lets you control the editing state.
You can handle the `onEditRowModelChange` callback to control the `GridEditRowsModel` state.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/EditRowModelControlGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Column with valueGetter

You can control the committed value when the edit move stops with the `onEditCellChangeCommitted` prop.
This is especially interesting when using the `valueGetter` on the column definition.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValueGetterGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

> ### Client-side validation

Reviewer: The UX on the validation is not flying.

1. There is little contrast between the validated and invalidated state. It's far from obvious to see the difference

<img width="251" alt="Screenshot 2021-04-14 at 12 03 52" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/114693229-af8e1680-9d19-11eb-917c-da51890e85c7.png">

vs.

<img width="268" alt="Screenshot 2021-04-14 at 12 05 28" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/114693281-bae14200-9d19-11eb-97bf-1cf0b7dbbb75.png">

2. It's undeniably wrong on dark mode

<img width="255" alt="Screenshot 2021-04-14 at 12 04 08" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/114693328-c7659a80-9d19-11eb-9e14-372409191597.png">

> Follow the following steps to validate the value in the cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the following steps to validate the value in the cells:
```

- Set the event handler `onEditCellChange`. It's invoked when a change is triggered by the edit input component.
- Set the event handler `onEditCellChangeCommitted` to validate or persist the new value. This handler is invoked when an end-user requests a change to be committed and before the cell reverts to view mode.

Alternatively, you can use the `GridEditRowsModel` state mentioned in the [Control editing](#control-editing) section.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateRowModelControlGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

#### Using apiRef [<span class="pro"></span>](https://material-ui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateCellApiRefGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

Reviewer: Without context, I had no idea what this demo was about. Looking closer, I understand the following:

```suggestion
You can reproduce the same behavior using the apiRef.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateCellApiRefGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}
```

### Server-side validation

Server-side validation works like client-side [validation](#validation).

- Use the `GridEditRowsModel` mentioned in the [Control editing](#control-editing) section.
- Or set the event handler `onEditCellChange` for `keydown` validation
- Set the event handler `onEditCellChangeCommitted` to validate and update the server when the change is committed.

**Note:** To prevent the default client-side behavior, use `event.stopPropagation()`.

> This demo shows how you can validate a username asynchronously and prevent the user from committing the value while validating.

Reviewer: Maybe to clear up confusion?

```suggestion
This demo shows how you can validate a username asynchronously and prevent the user from committing the value while validating. It's using `XGrid` but the same approach can be used with `DataGrid`.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/ValidateServerNameGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Custom edit component

To customize the edit component of a column, set the `renderEditCell` function available in the column definition `GridColDef`.

The demo lets you edit the ratings by double-clicking the cell.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/RenderRatingEditCellGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ### Edit using external button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Edit using external button [<span class="pro"></span>](https://material-ui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)
```

You can override the default [start editing](#start-editing) triggers using the `event.stopPropagation()` API on the synthetic React events.

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/StartEditButtonGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

Reviewer: A side note not directly related to this PR. Enforcing the focus on the cell seems plain wrong:

![focus](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/114694101-815d0680-9d1a-11eb-8a89-3f0441b20f3f.gif)

> ### Events

Reviewer: From what I understand

```suggestion
### Events [<span class="pro"></span>](https://material-ui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)
```

The editing feature leverages the event capability of the grid and the apiRef.
The following events can be imported and used to customize the edition:

- `GRID_CELL_EDIT_ENTER`: emitted when the cell turns to edit mode.
- `GRID_CELL_EDIT_EXIT`: emitted when the cell turns back to view mode.
- `GRID_CELL_EDIT_PROPS_CHANGE`: emitted when the edit input change.
- `GRID_CELL_EDIT_PROPS_CHANGE_COMMITTED`: emitted when the edit input change is submitted.

Catching events can be used to add a callback after an event while ignoring its triggers.

> _The demo shows how to catch the start & end edit events to log which cell is editing in an info message._

Reviewer: More of a general writing docs convention, We never used the _italic_ to describe the demos so far (AFAIK), so it seems more consistent with:

```suggestion
The demo shows how to catch the start & end edit events to log which cell is editing in an info message:
```

# Data Grid - Editing

> <p class="description">The data grid provides allows performing: create, read, update, and delete operations (CRUD).</p>

Reviewer 2: Maybe like this?
```suggestion
<p class="description">The data grid provides support for performing create, read, update, and delete operations (CRUD).</p>
```

> <p class="description">Data Grid will provide full support to create, read, update, and delete operations (CRUD).</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p class="description">The data grid provides allows performing: create, read, update, and delete operations (CRUD).</p>
```

## Cell editing

> Cell editing allows to edit the value of one cell at the time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cell editing allows to edit the value of one cell at a time.
```

> To activate editing on cells, set the 'editable' property of the column definition `GridColDef` object to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To activate editing on cells, set the `editable` property of the column definition `GridColDef` object to true.
```

```tsx
<DataGrid columns={[{ field: 'name', editable: true }]} />
```

> By default, a cell can turn into edit mode by double clicking on it, or using <kbd>ENTER</kbd> key, if the cell has focus.

Reviewer: `class="key"` is to hedge once we upgrade to v5. We added a class to support the valid a11y semantic when describing nested key combinations. See https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/24269.

```suggestion
By default, a cell can turn into edit mode by double-clicking on it, or using <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> key, if the cell has focus.
```

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/BasicEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

Reviewer: <img width="499" alt="Screenshot 2021-03-24 at 20 20 03" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/112371031-6d575380-8cde-11eb-90af-26b734d134e2.png">

Seems to add nothing, we could hide it.

```suggestion
{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/BasicEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": true}}
```

> ### Control cell editability with isCellEditable

Reviewer: The title is too long (I believe), see rule 3. of https://www.oreilly.com/content/the-eight-rules-of-good-documentation/

```suggestion
### Control cell editability
```

In addition to the `editable` flag on columns, you can control which cell is editable using `isCellEditable` prop.

In the demo below, the column `name` is not editable, and only the rows with an even `age` value are editable.
To make it more visible, we applied a green background on the editable cells.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/editing/IsCellEditableGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

> ### Validating the new cell value.

Reviewer: Shorter, no dots.

```suggestion
### Validating new values
```
